JUDY WOODRUFF: Iraqi leaders
and the top American military
commander in Iraq proclaimed the
liberation of the city
of Mosul yesterday.
But what's the next step
in that war-torn country?
Does the Iraqi government have
a plan to prevent ISIS from
returning and to rebuild Iraq's
second largest city?
For some answers, we
turn to Feisal Istrabadi.
He's a former Iraqi diplomat,
and he's now director of the
Middle East Center at Indiana
University, Bloomington.
Feisal Istrabadi, welcome
back to the program.
How much of a blow to
ISIS was the retaking
of the city of Mosul?
FEISAL ISTRABADI, Former Deputy
Iraqi Ambassador to United
Nations: Well, it's a huge blow,
because one of the ways in which
ISIL distinguished its brand
from al-Qaida before was that it
was able to conquer and
hold territory, erase an
international boundary,
declare a caliphate,
and engage in the fight against
forces that regard it as
infidel, be they other Muslims
or Western forces.
And so it sort of distinguished
itself in that way.
And now it is retreating.
It has lost the largest
city that it occupied.
There are plans under way to
make it lose Raqqa as well
in Syria, and slowly -- and
hopefully not slowly
to expel it from Iraq.
So, it's a psychological and an
ideological, huge blow to ISIL.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
does it still control?
What capability
does it still have?
FEISAL ISTRABADI: Well, it still
has the ability - - I mean, your
own reporting earlier in the
program was that it still is
able to put on sort of the
skirmish attacks, although, last
week, it was able to
manage to conduct an
attempt at a counterattack,
which was repelled,
of course.
But the main fear that
I have now is that ISIL
becomes a classical
terrorist organization,
as al-Qaida was before, able
to pull off, you know, attacks
of varying size in Baghdad
and other places.
And we're already seeing that
it is metamorphosing into
that kind of an organization.
And that again is
deeply disturbing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And how
well-equipped is the government
of Iraq to deal with that?
FEISAL ISTRABADI: It's
very difficult to repel
those sorts of attacks.
You have to have perfect
intelligence and a perfect
ability to respond.
And, unfortunately, neither the
Iraqi government now, nor the
Americans when they had a large
presence, when the U.S. had a
large presence in Iraq, have
been able to control that.
The ultimate solution for this
problem has to be political.
It has to be a situation where
sort of the underlying disease
which has allowed at least
enough people to fail
to participate in the
political process, that
sort of disease has
to be treated, rather than
continuing to treat the
symptoms of the disease.
And that, we have collectively,
the Iraqis, the international
community, we have collectively
failed to do that
over the years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're referring
to the sectarian divisions in
Iraq that have led to one group
prevailing over another.
Do you see any improvement in
the Shia-Sunni divisions in
Iraq over the last several years
since the larger
war ended there?
FEISAL ISTRABADI: I see hope
that the future need not
be what the past has been.
I think that, in distinction
to his predecessor, the current
prime minister of Iraq has good
intentions.
What we don't have,
however, is a plan.
Good intentions will not get
us past this sort of impasse
that we have been in since
after 2003.
There needs to be a coming
together of the Iraqi political
class, and a sort of a sorting
out of what our priorities are
and how we prepare our modus
vivendi, how we engage in
reconciliation, what kinds of
power-sharing we're willing
to engage, all within a larger
constitutional,
democratic framework.
And that, unfortunately,
we haven't done.
And now we have to do it at
the same time as we have the
reconstruction of the country
at hand, as well, of course, as
providing immediate humanitarian
relief for the refugees
fleeing the cities that are
being liberated from ISIL.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And when you
speak of we having to do this,
are you referring to the United
States or are you referring
to the Iraqi government?
FEISAL ISTRABADI: All of us.
I think that that is something
that the international
community, the United
States, of course the
Iraqis in the first instance
-- it has to be an Iraqi
project in the first instance.
But the United States is
a part of the process.
The international community
needs to encourage these three
tracks, sort of the immediate
humanitarian relief,
the physical rebuilding
of the country, and,
more importantly, the
political rebuilding
of the country.
That is going to be sort of
a multipronged effort that
has to occur simultaneously.
And the Iraqis will
need the support of the
international community.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And very, very
quickly, you see the will of
the international community
to do that?
FEISAL ISTRABADI: I hope
so, because the failure
of the Iraqis to do
this, the failure of the
international community
to support this effort
will mean that, just
as al-Qaida left ISIL,
this incarnation of ISIL will
lead to ISIL 2.0, 3.0, 4.0.
And that's just condemning the
Middle East, the region and
perhaps the world to an endless
cycle of violence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A
sobering message.
Feisal Istrabadi, we
thank you very much.
FEISAL ISTRABADI: Thank you.
It's a pleasure, as always.